---
title: 'Consider Becoming a Civil Service Economist (UK)'
date: 2023-09-08
readingTime: TRUE
categories: ["Civil Service", "Career"]
---
## TL;DR

- Competitive starting pay in line with median salaries for economics graduates.
- Strong pension schemes offering both defined benefit and defined contribution options.
- Ample opportunities for skill development and continuous learning through the Government Economics Service.
- High potential for social impact working on major national issues.
- Excellent flexibility, allowing for a balanced work-life experience.
- Opens doors for various career paths both within and outside of the civil service.
---
With applications for the Civil Service Fast Stream about to open I thought I'd write a bit about why you should consider becoming a civil service economist.  It's a great career path that has competitive pay, interesting work, loads of flexibility, and can enable your future career across a range of options. 

I started my career in the civil service through the Mainstream Economist programme. This differs from the Fast Stream in that you are put into a specific role at [Higher Executive Officer](https://defrajobs.co.uk/working-here/civil-service-grades-explained/) (HEO) level on a permanent contract. The opportunity for rotations and advancement are department specific and less structured than the Fast Stream, but in general are very similar. I'll do a follow-up post explaining the differences between the two schemes in more detail.

**Pay & Pension**

The pay as a civil service economist is good, especially for early careers. 

The base salary range for central government departments is around £28,000 - £33,000 per year in London and around £2,000 less in other parts of the country, right around the [median full-time income](https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/earningsandworkinghours/bulletins/annualsurveyofhoursandearnings/2022) for the UK. Economists are also often eligible for extra pay through various policies, including masters uplifts and economist/analyst allowances. These also vary by department but can be as much as £4000 in the first year. For HEO economists in London the lowest pay would likely be around £30,000 and the highest £38,000, with the median person somewhere in the middle. From what I can find online the average salary for UK economics graduates in high skilled employment is [£30,000](https://www.thecompleteuniversityguide.co.uk/student-advice/careers/what-do-graduates-do-and-earn), which makes the civil service very competitive compared to the average job you might find. Fast Stream economists come in at a slightly lower level of pay on £29,000 in London with some opportunity for allowances, and get an uplift after the first or second year to ~£38,000. 

While these salaries are not low, they're also not high. The real jump in economist pay is at the first managerial level, [Grade 7](https://defrajobs.co.uk/working-here/civil-service-grades-explained/). This is technically two levels above the entry-level HEO roles, but in practice it is normal to go straight to a Grade 7 job after 2-3 years of experience at HEO. Grade 7 pay is similar to HEO in that the range is wide across the departments. The lowest is £50,000 and the highest paid departments can reach £61,000. This is equal to the average salary for [LSE economics graduates 5-years post-graduation](https://www.topuniversities.com/student-info/university-news/economics-graduates-are-paid-highest-salaries), and  the [mean average full-time salary for Londoners](https://www.projectfinanciallyfree.com/what-is-a-good-salary-in-london/#:~:text=The%20average%20salary%20in%20London%20as%20of%20mid%2D2023%20is,on%20the%20boroughs%20of%20London.). 

In addition to the salary, new joiners are eligible for the Civil Service pension. It's not as good as it once was but still excellent compared to most in the private sector. There are two options available to new joiners, Alpha (defined benefit) and Partnerships (defined contribution). 

Alpha is functionally an average salary pension scheme where employees build up a % of their earnings through each year of service. It is then paid out as a fixed amount of money each year based on how much was built up, it is also inflation adjusted. If you're planning on staying in the civil service for most of your career, the Alpha scheme starts to become very valuable by the time you approach 45-50, especially if you get early promotions to ramp up the contributions. The flipside of this is that it's only accessible from official retirement age (currently 67 for new grads, but likely to be higher at time of retirement). There is an option to take it earlier at a reduced amount, but I don't know how big the deductions are. 

The Partnerships scheme is also generous, with 8% given straight away and then a match up to 3% for employee contributions. This gives 14% of gross salary in pension contributions for only 3% of actual pay. If you're planning on staying for less than 5 years I'd recommend doing this as it retains more flexibility for later in your career because you can consolidate it with pensions from other employers. DC pension pots can be accessed up to 10 years prior to official retirement age too, which is something to consider if you are interested in retiring early. 

I'll write a more detailed post about the civil service pension schemes at some later point and link it here. 

**Work & Training**

In the civil service you are likely to be working on issues which affect millions of people across the UK. I'm not a strong Effective Altruist by any means but it's highly likely you will be involved with impactful stuff pretty early on depending on department/role. During my three years, across 2 roles, I worked extensively on issues related to climate change and COVID-19. I helped support a massive tree planting programme that will hopefully help meet the UKs 2050 climate targets. I worked with experts across the agricultural economics sector to model future options that could further contribute to these goals. I met with the Climate Change Committee and other experts across the climate sector to understand the economics of climate adaptation and how they apply to the UK. And I provided analysis that was going straight to senior stakeholders across government and the Chief Medical Officers for the UK and 4 Nations, including Chris Witty for a range of COVID-19 indicators. While some of the work wasn't very glamorous, I was proud of what I was doing and felt that I was contributing towards making the world a better place.

In addition, as an economist in the civil service you'll be a member of the Government Economics Service (GES). Through this there are a huge range of corporate opportunities outside of your role to get involved in. For my first year I was involved with the organising committee for GES Events and helped set up a series of panel discussions between expert economists inside and outside of government. This included discussions on COVID-19 economic policy and vaccine distribution, with panelists such as Alex Tabarrock, Rachel Glennerster and Andy Haldane. The GES also has trainings made available to its members, both in person and online. These range from technical skill building like Python for Economists, to soft skills such as Writing for Ministers as a Specialist. There are also various opportunities through the GES and certain departments to get funding and support for advanced degrees. My ex-manager was completing a partially funded Masters throughout my time on his team, and has now dropped to part-time in his role to pursue a PHD. There's also increasing emphasis being placed on learning coding with departments making more resources available, including free DataCamp licenses and the ONS beginning to run a graduate course in data science. Utilising all of these opportunities is very actively encouraged, with civil servants expected to spend 20% of their time (i.e. 1 day a week) on learning and development. 

**Flexibility**

While it's a bit of a cliche for the public sector, the flexibility is amazing. This can be department and line manager specific, but in my experience I have always been given near full autonomy over my working hours and working location. As long as work is done, it's neither here nor there when or where I did it. There are some limits to this, working from abroad is obviously not allowed, especially for departments with higher security risks, but generally no one will care if you're logging off at 4pm when all your work is done. It's also very lax about working from home, most departments are still in the phase of 2 days in office, 3 days at home, but dependant on line manager, fully remote is also an option. 

Further, all departments follow a flexitime model - this means that any overtime worked can be claimed back later to maintain contracted hours. Up to 2 days of flexi are allowed to be stored at any given time and there can be up to 3 days of debt. This is really great for jobs where there are large up and downs in workload as you build up time to take off when it quietens down. My ex-manager utilised this to do his part-time masters, working a compressed week of 4 longer days and using Fridays to attend lectures. 

The flexibility also extends to your ability to choose what you work on. Within my roles I was able to shape the projects I worked on and the tools I used to do them. In my first role most of the models the team worked on were excel based, but I was allowed to try and move as much as possible into R, developing my own skills and helping improve best practice in the department. Once you're in the civil service you also gain access to departmental Expressions of Interest (EOIs) and the internal civil service jobs board. EOIs allow you to apply for roles within your department through a simplified application process, making it easier to move than the standard process. Many of these positions are time-limited (e.g., 3-6 months), providing a low-hassle way to gain new experiences over short periods. The internal jobs board gives you access to many more jobs than is available as an external applicant. The Foreign Commonwealth and Development Office, one of the most sought after, will often only posts their jobs to here. By having more choice it lets you pick opportunities that best fit your interests and career development. The applications also get easier once you're in because you can learn exactly how the assessment and interviewing works, allowing you to tailor your experiences as required. 

**Future Career**

Working in the civil service doesn't limit your career options down the road. Thanks to the ability to apply across different departments and the freedom to shape your own role, you can really build up the skills and experience you want for your future. For example, I managed to pivot into data analysis and now I'm in a data scientist role which I really enjoy. Others choose to go into specific policy areas such as environmental economics or transport economics. These can allow you to pursue higher education and research, or move into consultancies that work on those issues more directly. And others choose to simply stay in a role or department they enjoy once they've found a good fit. 

Unfortunately, there is a bit of a hard cap on how far you can go in the civil service as an economist, especially with respect to pay. Most economists will top out at G7 because the next layers of management are generally policy related rather than analytical. This, combined with the lack of pay rises, means that it can be hard to meaningfully raise salary beyond £60,000 per year in economist roles in government. I know people that have worked in the civil service for most of their career and they live happy and comfortable lives. However, if you're the type that wants to be making six figures and living in luxury it will never take you there. In the long-term graduate opportunities in investment banking, management consulting, and big 4 accountancy, will see much higher compensation than those in the civil service. The way around this is to be strategic from the start of your career and tailor it towards the type of job that has a higher ceiling. For me this meant pivoting towards data science, but I have seen others successfully move into various forms of consultancy (mostly economic), or going back to university to pivot into a new field entirely. The good news is that your experiences as a civil servant will be viewed very positively by prospective future employers. 

**Conclusion**

Joining the civil service as an economist is a solid option for those approaching their final year and not sure what they want to work on. It pays well, offers interesting and impactful work, loads of training opportunities, and the flexibility to design your own career path. I recommend it. 






