---
title: 'Kigali Update #3 '
date: 2024-01-18
readingTime: True 
---
Well, it’s been a hot minute since I’ve done one of these and is now actually a 3.5 update but ce la vie. 

It feels like a lot and nothing has happened in the past 6 months. I’ve travelled a ridiculous amount, having been to Tanzania/Zanzibar twice, trip home + Denmark for Christmas/New Year’s, a birthday trip to Mozambique/Eswatini, and a family holiday to the Seychelles. On the work front I saw the end of a project that was both very rewarding and frustrating for various reasons. And I’ve made and lost a bunch of friends to the natural churn of expat living in Kigali. 

First things first, work has improved massively compared to the first 8 months of being here. I am now involved in a couple projects that I’m able to move forward with far more agency than what I was being tasked with before. I have buy in for the main project I’ll be working on in my time here and I have an engaged colleague that is helping me. This is great for two reasons, one I can actually move things forward and generally not feel like I’m having to rely on others to take the next step, two I’m able to mentor my colleague in a way that feels natural and easy. As I’ve said previously, my main aim from working here is to have a meaningful impact on the longer-term trajectory of the institution, which means having impact beyond what I can achieve individually. Mentoring and upskilling my colleagues is integral to achieving what I want to, and this is kind of happening now. The other thing that’s good about my current projects is that they’re kind of hard for me too. It’s in that sweet spot of being hard enough that you can’t just auto-pilot through the work, but not too difficult that you’re discouraged from making any progress at all. Since getting back from Christmas my attendance at work has been a bit spotty due to poor sleep/health, but I’m starting to adjust again and expect this to improve. 

On the social side it’s been a slow start to the new year after a high point late last year. The last 4 months of 2023 were honestly pretty amazing, and I made a couple of friends that I really really like and got on well with. Having a strong pair in any friend group seems to be the most important thing for making things happen. The core two can decide to do something regardless of others being interested but ironically others are far more likely to join because it’s definitely going to happen. In general, people in Kigali are incredibly flaky and will not commit to plans until they are forced to. It makes planning as a one very hard because you can’t rely on anyone else. At least two of my close friends from this time were also planners and had a bias for action. For the last 8 weekends of the year I think there was some form of activity planned in groups ranging from 3-12 which was just awesome. The unfortunate news is that the person I was closest to and helped with most of the planning is now gone. I’ve taken January to regroup a bit and try to improve a few friendships on a more 1-1 basis which has been nice, but also somewhat isolating. It’s time to start planning group activities again and making things happen, even though I know I’m going to get frustrated herding the cats of Kigali friendship groups. The upside is that there are always great people to meet when I put the effort in to get out there. 

For travel I’ve now been on 45 flights since arriving in Rwanda which shows little sign of letting up. In the next 2 months I’ve got a trip to the Kenyan coast and an Easter break to Cairo planned. I’m also aiming to go Madagascar in late May, a big Victoria Falls trip planned with my parents in November, and enough holidays to fit in 2 or 3 more smaller holidays. This is a new arena where I’ve started to develop my taste, and I think I’ve now got a good taste in how I like to travel and the level of planning involved that makes in enjoyable. There’s a balance to spontaneity vs organised activities and it can be hard to strike. I’m now getting that balance pretty well on most of my trips. There’s also a mentality aspect to it, travelling in Africa there’s lots of things that can and do go wrong if you plan too much. Knowing when to get worked up and push for a resolution vs just let things resolve themselves has made the experience far more enjoyable generally.

In the main, I’ve been doing well for the past 6 months, and I’m excited for the next year. I think it’s going to fly by. 

Thanks for reading and see you in the next one.
