---
date: 2025-04-14
title: "Low cost intervention of sending a nice message"
readingTime: TRUE
---

This is a riff on one of my favourite blog posts by Tyler Cowen - [The high-return activity of raising others’ aspirations](https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2018/10/high-return-activity-raising-others-aspirations.html). 

Something that I’ve always done whenever a colleague is leaving or a friend embarking on a new adventure, or indeed me leaving others behind is to send a little message saying what I appreciate about that person. This never really had a goal per se but has always felt like the right thing to do when someone is moving on. I am not always the most expressive person and have been told in the past that it's hard to get a read if I actually like someone or not. When a chapter is closing it seems a natural point to be able to let them know in certain terms the things that I noticed and enjoyed from spending time with them. I think it's probably the highest return/low-cost activity that I do with frequency. 

For me this became an active thing that I do for friends after reading Bob Mortimer's excellent autobiography 'And Away...'. The crux of the book was his recent health scare that ended with him confronting his own mortality. The thing that scared him the most about dying was leaving without having told the people that were most special to him how he felt about them. The last few pages of the book contain letters he had written to his wife and his best friend telling them exactly how much and why he loved them. It really moved me and just makes sense within my general philosophy of life. There are few activities like this that cost you almost nothing to do but can make a world of difference to the people you really care about. 

It has featured a lot in the past few weeks as I finished up my time in Rwanda. I wrote a message for all of the people that made my time there particularly special, and I think it deepened so many of those friendships. It gave space for both parties to let the other know how much the relationship meant and the things that we'll miss and remember. I was pleasantly surprised by the moments that others picked out, it's often a random conversation, or invitation that made all the difference for them, and I didn't even realise. 

It feels a bit... uncouth (?) to verbalise and analyse this thing that I do, but I really heavily recommend it as a way to improve your personal relationships and to bring a bit more niceness into the world. Something I've never understood is ending things on a bad note for no particular reason, it's nice to have people think nice things about you and it's also nice to let people know that they are appreciated. You never know when someone is going to feature in your life again and ending things this way has always served me well. The fun part is also noticing things about people that maybe doesn't come up as much in other settings for them. When it's with colleagues moving on I have personally been extremely touched by the things that others saw in me, and conversely hope the same with what I identified in them. Of course, there are times where it pays to know your audience - a friend did not feel that being reliable was a sufficiently nice compliment, despite my protestations that it's amongst the things I value most highly in another person! (He doesn't appreciate how insane I am about flakiness being the worst trait ever).  

And while I've mostly discussed this in the contexts of endings, it obviously should not be limited to the bookends of your relationships with people. Something I actively work on is just saying these things to friends and colleagues directly at any given time. However, it can often be hard to create space for a deeper reflection on a relationship and a person depending on the settings you interact in. Goodbyes are a natural place for this type of reflection, and it's useful to keep this in mind the next time someone is leaving your life. I encourage you to do this for any relationship in your life. It's surprising how easy it is to do when you're saying nice things about people you truly like.


 