---
title: Leaving Home
date: 2022-11-16
categories: ['Personal']
tags: ['reflective', 'personal', 'uk']
readingTime: True 
---

Almost everyone that I know who has ever spoken to me about my dreams in life would be able to tell you that I’ve never seen my long-term future in the UK. Since I can remember, and have been able to contemplate such things, I’ve wanted to explore and live somewhere else in the world. For the most part this has been North America (mainly the United States), and while over time that specific part of the dream has waned, I’ve never properly considered staying.

The more I’ve reflected on it, the more rational my decision feels. Given the long-term trends currently facing the UK and the uncertain political environment, short of winning the lottery, I don’t think it’s possible for me to live the life I want to in the UK without facing a set of trade-offs I wouldn’t be subject to elsewhere. I want a family. I want a meaningful career. I want to be able to afford a good standard of living. And I want the time to enjoy it. This set of preferences is becoming more and more a lost dream reserved for generations gone by. Young people in the UK are being taxed more, experiencing lower wage growth, and are increasingly blocked out of the housing market to service an aging and increasingly hostile population. I have a broad optimism that these issues can be fixed, unfortunately I do not believe it will be possible on timescales that make sense for my life.

And so, in some ways, it feels as though I’m forced to say goodbye. Now, I’m preparing to leave the UK, and will likely never come back permanently. My first destination, Rwanda, is not the one I envisioned and almost certainly not where I’ll end up calling home after my two-year contract. But it does represent the first step on my journey to realising my lifelong dream of moving away. And although I’m excited for this new opportunity and new stage of my life, I find myself surprisingly sad.

Despite my long-held dreams and ‘rational’ arguments for leaving, I really do wish I could see a future in the UK. I love this country and am so grateful to have been able to call it home for most of my life. I love British culture. I love the friends and family I have here. I love going for a shop at Big Tesco’s. And I have really loved living in London for the past 3 years. It is a city that stands above almost all others in its diversity, excitement, and opportunity. COVID-19 taking a substantial portion of that time away from me will forever frustrate me and I leave with a list of things I still want to do almost as long as the list of things that I did. 

The most saddening part of all is being able to see the potential of London and, more broadly, the UK whenever I walk around. Reminiscent of Thanos and Tony Stark, I (and many other policy nerds) am cursed with knowledge. We know just how much better our country could be if we managed to get out of our own way. A Britain which built new housing, new railways, reformed public services, bet on growth, and fought rent-seeking would be a country to be reckoned with and in my opinion the best in the world. Instead, I am forced to watch managed decline and a likely exodus of similarly minded young professionals that can see the writing on the wall. I hope that changes, and I hope I find my way back home when it does.