---
title: 'Kigali Update #1'
date: 2023-04-09
readingTime: True 
categories: ["Personal", "Rwanda"]
---

It’s coming up on the 4-month anniversary of me moving to Kigali (1/6th of the time I’ll be here) so I thought I’d write down some thoughts and reflections of my experience so far.

Conceptually it’s been a bit odd thinking about how different my life/world is now compared to a year ago. I hadn’t even been properly considering leaving home for another year or two and it wasn’t going to be for a low-income country. I was applying to the program that brought me here on a whim following a recommendation from my manager at the time, and in my head wasn’t really considering it as a genuine opportunity.

Nonetheless, I’m here now and so far, it’s been a strange but exciting experience. My start at the new job was disjointed with my start date being pushed to the 17th of December instead of the 10th. Both of my managers were on holiday and half the team I was supposed to be working with were away. I was given a laptop but not really any direction about what to do so I mostly just played around with ChatGPT and made some random charts and graphs. Even when my managers were back though it wasn’t made totally clear to me what I’m supposed to be doing, and I had a couple of pre-planned holidays that added to the initial disruption. And on top of that I was varying levels of ill for about 2-3 weeks, missing days of work and working from home so as not to infect others.

Having had a clean month in March I feel like I’ve found my feet a bit more, both socially in Kigali, and at work, with projects starting to take shape and feeling like I can add value, and actually going to events/spaces where I can meet new people. As covered a bit later I haven’t really found my people yet.

I thought I’d structure this as giving some positives, negatives, and other more neutral points from my experiences so far and finish off with a general update on how I’m doing. I’ll probably try to do these posts every 3 or 4 months just as a record of what’s happening, and so I can more critically assess my experiences of being here.

**The Positives**

* I love being in this part of the world just for the ability to travel to a different set of countries than I would be able to from the UK. Getting the opportunity to explore Africa with low time costs is hugely valuable to me (even though the financial cost of the trips is high). I value my time much more than the money it costs to do them and even though I’ve only done 2 trips so far (one of which I’m currently on) I’m planning a lot more. By the time I’m done here (Dec 2024) I want to have visited at least 10 new African countries (current count is 4) and I think if I’m efficient with holidays that’ll be closer to 15. Luckily Rwanda has decent flight routes to the different parts of Africa (apart from the North-West) so it’s reasonably efficient getting to most of the countries I would want to go to. I hadn’t travelled very much in the past 10 or so years after having done lots growing up and didn’t feel like I cared that much about seeing the world. But now I want to go everywhere – my favourite thing to do these past few months is just look at a map and figure out the trips I want to do in the future.

* My co-workers are genuinely lovely people that want to learn and do the absolute best that they can. I found it somewhat amusing that my official contract said that I should conduct my duties with ‘zeal’ but my colleagues really do approach their work in that way, and it’s inspiring. On one hand it is somewhat bizarre coming here as someone that is relatively young and having much more developed technical skills and working habits, but on the other it makes me grateful that I can help my new colleagues improve their own skills and that they’re so keen to do it. I think that if I’m able to teach my colleagues as much as I aspire to and instil some of the working practices that are common back in the UK, it’ll be by far my biggest legacy from my time here.

* Rwanda is an easy country to live in. I have been told that Kigali is not ‘real Africa’ a few times now and I can see why. The country, and Kigali especially, are remarkably safe and orderly in a way that I’m not used to in low-income countries. My previous experience of living abroad was in India where it is almost the polar opposite in terms of the general energy. Mumbai is easily the most chaotic place I have ever been whereas I would probably describe Kigali as somewhat sleepy. The benefit of this is that it’s made it very easy to settle in (from a general life perspective) i.e. find a nice neighbourhood to live in and start to get into a nice routine. The flip side of this is that there maybe isn’t as much general excitement or spontaneity but I’m ok with the trade-off right now.

* Cost of living is very low. While, as mentioned above, travel internationally is relatively expensive here, it’s almost completely offset by how low the general cost of living is. My room in a shared house is about 500 USD per month where we have a big garden, huge shared living space, a maid that comes 3 times a week, a security guard, and in one of the nicest neighbourhoods in the city. Similarly, food while not the best, is mostly cheap by western standards, especially at some of the nicer restaurants. And moto taxis (the main form of transport) cost less than 1 USD to get almost anywhere I’d want to within Kigali. My daily commute takes about 10 minutes each way and is less than 2 USD.

**The Negatives**

* The food.  I feel as though the most popular question to ask someone when they have visited or are living somewhere new is ‘what is the food like?’ and unfortunately for Rwanda the answer is ‘not great’. I wouldn’t say that the food here is bad by any stretch, but it is quite basic. For various reasons, which my flatmate has begun to investigate, Rwanda doesn’t have much of a food culture. It’s considered rude here to eat on the street and as a result there are essentially zero street vendors, and not very much prepared food in general to buy. The standard lunch is to go to a restaurant (or in the case of work, the office canteen) and get a one-plate buffet. The buffets themselves are generally limited to plain rice, some form of potato, beans, beef and spinach. While those don’t sound bad in principle the beans are not particularly tasty, the beef is often low quality, and so are the greens. There are some more upmarket options for Rwandan food at a few restaurants, but I’ve not been impressed when I have had it.

* Availability of lots of goods/foodstuffs is poor, and where it does exist, they are expensive. Basic consumer electronics, such as microwaves, blenders, and TVs, cost 2-3x what they would be in the UK. And the variety of them is almost non-existent. We’ve been trying to buy a toaster and there are two options, a Kenyan made 4-slice industrial style toaster that costs 40 USD and a Bosch 2-slice toaster for 50 USD. I think at some point we’ll cave and live with the reality of it costing slightly more but it still feels quite bad. Additionally, most western food is not available here - they have some of the more popular things like Heinz Baked Beans and name-brand sauces, but the choice of confectionary, dried goods, and generic ingredients isn’t great. Meat and cheese are also generally low quality unless you’re willing to pay a reasonable premium. Personally, my comfort food is gummy sweets, which do tend to be available at a grocery store near my house, however because they’re imported from the UK they have the price on the packet, never failing to make me feel extra bad about my indulgent purchase. I’m planning on cooking more at home and making western food for myself as while the raw ingredients are more expensive than they are at home, it’s still substantially cheaper than eating out for most meals.

* One of the most confusing things about Rwanda is the cost of the cars. Unlike its richer East Africa neighbours (Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda), Rwanda has decided to have right hand drive on its roads. This isn’t the most peculiar decision on the face of it, as the DRC, Burundi, and most countries south of Rwanda follow the same rule but I think contributes a lot to how extremely expensive cars are in Rwanda [Update: Burundi and the DRC both have right hand drive but the side of the steering wheel doesn't matter in Burundi and is on the right in the DRC. This makes Rwanda the only country in the bloc of East African countries that requires a car to have the steering wheel on the left-hand side.]. I’m not aware of a formal study on how much this is causal, but I suspect they would be much cheaper if they were able to import cars from Kenya, Uganda, and Tanzania, as they are the most developed supply chain routes into the country. I think there are also high duties on the cars that they can import, with Toyota having had a state-licensed exemption of some kind for a while. This means that almost every car in the country is a Santa Fe or Rav4 from the past 25 years. I paid around 4000 USD for 1995 Rav4 that is literally older than me. The only good thing about this is that they tend to hold their value and I should be able to make back most of my money when I sell it. 

* Friends. I think this is potentially an unfair levy against Rwanda, but it is unfortunately true that I haven’t yet made what I would consider a strong friend group here. I have started to get closer with my housemates and begun doing more social activities within Kigali now that I am no longer travelling as much and have been healthy, but it’s a slow burn. An additional hurdle to this is that many of the expat community, who it would be easiest to make friends with, are all here on varying lengths of contracts. This means that some have already been here for years with established friend groups and less appetite to make new ones, but also people that you really vibe with might only be here for another 1 or 2 months, strongly reducing the incentive to invest too much into them. At this stage I’m not thinking too deeply about it and have much higher priority on just finding people I enjoy hanging out with, but it’ll begin to be a consideration as friendships deepen.

**Other** 

* The city is very green but doesn’t have much proper greenspace. There are loads of trees and grass linings of the streets, but not really any actual parks. I have went to the two ‘parks’ near to my house but both of them are functionally closed off, with you not allowed to step on the grass and definitely not allowed to play any sport or just hang out there for a picnic or something. We have a nice garden which I spend some time sitting in, though it’s quite close to a couple of the roads and moto taxis are quite loud so it’s not as peaceful as I might’ve hoped. The greenness is nice and the city is vibrant to look at and travel through, but it’s odd that you don’t have public greenspace in a way that I’m used to in more developed countries.

* Labour is absurdly cheap here. I think it’s hard to internalise how unproductive the economy can be until you see it in the flesh. Daily I will see hundreds of people whose job is to transport bananas and general cargo on a normal bike. It’s more cost-effective to do this than to pay for some form of mechanised transport which is just insane to me. We pay 100 USD a month to our maid who comes three times a week from 9-5, and that’s apparently on the high end. A more normal amount would be around 70-80 USD. In some ways it's a bit uncomfortable and I’ve thought a lot about how absurd it is that I’m in this position where we have such radically different lives. It doesn’t feel right that I make a substantial multiple of my maid at half the age. And it honestly makes me pretty happy that the UK doesn’t have the same culture of live-in help. It was the same in India, and I understand that it is a mutually beneficial trade to make, but living with the realities of the economics is very different to discussion of it in the abstract. Living in a place where the inequality is so stark reinforces my belief that development is still the most important problem for us to solve.

**How I'm feeling now**

Right now, I’m pretty happy with where I am. I think I’m through the toughest part with the initial acclimation + what is likely to be the least busy portion of my working life here. It was tough because I primarily came because I want to make an impact and was feeling like I wasn’t doing anything of value. I can slowly feel that changing and that with my projects and long-term work plan emerging I’m going to start having that impact and really starting to change things in my institution. I’m planning another couple trips in the next month or two, though these will be shorter weekend break style holidays, and am booked to go back to the UK at the end of June which I’m excited for.

Thanks for reading and I’ll see you in the next one.